Is there a normal guy that we have?
Coming in?
Yeah, from-
Bright
Yeah. Do you miss him?
No. No, I prefer it. He was great.
Want to go in there?
Can you tell him exactly-
Oops. Mr. Chair.
Sorry. Thank you. Yeah.
Still nice. That's nice.
Morning.
Good morning,
Governor.
Morning, Governor.
Good morning.
Morning, Paul, Karen.
Morning. Morning.
This is the powerful threesome.
Welcome. We're delighted to have you this morning, and
we'll just open up for you to have some opening comments, and then obviously
Q&A.
Yes. Well, thank you so much for having us here.
It's really, really brief, but just to say that yesterday, the
Monetary Policy Committee voted to leave the OCR on hold at
2.25%.
Three committee members voted for the hold, and three voted to increase the OCR by
25 basis points, and I used my casting vote to
hold.
I
want to stress that this is the first monetary policy statement with
attributed votes and names of the Monetary Policy
Committee members in the record of meetings.
Some more information on the judgements the different committee members
did is in the record of meetings. And as a committee, we welcome
this increased transparency, and we believe it will
strengthen New Zealanders' understanding of monetary policy going forward.
Thank you.
Thank you. And can I just acknowledge that it is actually...
I know you led some of that work out in terms of that transparency, and I think it
is helpful for New Zealand to see the tensions rather than just the decision.
Thank you. We're going to kick off with Joanne De Beer Russell.
Thank you, Chair. Good morning, and welcome.
I think this is the first MPS you've fronted for us, is it, as monetary policy
statement?
Second.
Second one. This is the second one.
February.
I've lost track.
And thank you for that transparency.
I found the split vote really interesting because we're actually in very uncertain
times, so I think that split vote
reflects the
sheer uncertainty we're trying to deal with.
And I see it as a strength rather than a weakness that we
have that degree of discussion
within the Reserve Bank. So
really welcome to that. Look,
there's obvious issues around the war in Iran,
but there's so much uncertainty there that actually what I really want to
focus on is some of the other issues, and that for me particularly is around
employment and unemployment,
and
your projections there. So if I look
at the difference between the February and the May monetary
policy statements, we're now
projecting quite a bit more unemployment than we were in February.
Can you just speak to that a little, please?
Yes. So what we saw before the
conflict in the Middle East was that employment was starting to grow, so we saw
a recovery in the labor market. Now
what we see is that we expect unemployment to stay
at the current level or slightly higher, about
5.4%,
into next year. And it's really the case, what's
causing that is the weaker demand that comes from the fact that fuel prices have
gone up and related products. And we see that that means that both
households and businesses are more cautious in this
environment. We see that in the forward-looking indicators of different
kinds of business surveys. It's what we hear when we go out and meet with
businesses.
We do expect growth
to slow down in the near term, but we expect
this year still to have some growth, and that means that going into next year when
we see inflation falling back,
that we'll see better growth and then that employment will
start growing again.
Thank you. One of my
understandings is that
unemployment
and
inflation are inversely
related.
So if we're expecting unemployment to increase, we would expect
inflation to more or less decrease.
That's a way of controlling inflation rates.
But we've obviously got this external factor of fuel prices fitting in here.
Is that something that's going on in this space?
So what we
do emphasize in the report is that this is
a supply disruption and cost pushes that will
increase some of the prices in the near term, and particularly then fuel prices and
related prices. So we can have an environment where,
unfortunately, inflation goes up and employment stays high for
some time. But the fact that the labor market is weak in the near term,
we think that that will mean that wage growth will be subdued, and that means
that inflation is more likely to fall back towards
target relatively soon because of the
weak labor market.
There is a relationship, but
unfortunately, it's complicated in the sense that we can have both higher
inflation and in the near term, a weak labor market.
Thank you. So I've got a couple more and then I'll-
That's all right.
So what
is always... Well, it hasn't always, it's something that puzzles me, is
one of the things we're doing with the OCR, if we increase the OCR, mortgage rates
go up, and that takes money out of circulation because it's going back to the
banks. Now, at the moment, we've got fuel prices increasing, and
that means that households have less money to spend on other stuff.
Yes.
decreases. It's a way of taking money out of the economy as well.
So this is why I'm puzzled about,
I guess,
this is why my instinct, I'm not an economist, would've been to hold the
OCR because the money is being taken out of the economy in other
directions. Are you able to...
It's a little bit of a lay person's understanding-
Yeah
... of what's going on.
Yeah. So let me just start by saying that
what we actually see is what you're describing.
Of course, this is a hit to households' real income, and we do see, for
example, in card transaction data that households are
spending. It's too early to have the official statistics, but some
early high-frequency data show that households are spending less on
other things like retail and hospitality, for example.
What we do know is that businesses are facing higher costs,
both for fuel but also for transport.
And what we're looking for and discussing at quite some length in the monetary
policy statement is how much will that weaker
demand from higher costs,
and higher inflation hold back other price increases.
And the more other price increases it can hold back, that means inflation will
be passing relatively quickly and come back to a low and
stable level. But we could also see firms
being able to pass on these costs more, and then we see more broad-based inflation,
and that's exactly what we will be watching really carefully now, and that
would influence the OCR and where we're going.
But Paul, please-
Yeah
... comment as well
Just to say, effectively, broadly
speaking, there's two
really large forces acting on medium-term inflation.
One is what you described, which is weak demand in the economy because real
income
growth is weaker than it was.
So that is
taking inflation pressures out of the economy.
But on the other side of it, as the governor's talking about, as costs have gone
up,
the temptation for businesses is to pass that on in the form of higher
prices. And if they were able to do that en masse,
then that relative price shift and the price of oil would become
generalized inflationary pressure.
So on the one hand, there's that going on,
but then weak demand in the economy is pushing medium-term inflation in the other
direction. And effectively our job
is to thread an OCR through that so that on net, we end up at
2% inflation over the medium term.
Thank you, and last question, Mr. Chair. Look, thank you.
I appreciate it's really uncertain times, but the other thing is in terms of
those unemployment projections, have you
factored in the announced public sector job cuts and the
ongoing impact from those, not just the jobs, but also
the downstream jobs as well?
So the way that we do our forecasting is that we
take official decisions into account, and this
is well described in the monetary policy statement when we talk about the
key projection assumptions.
And what we say there is that we use the
half-year economic and fiscal update from 25, from December,
and then we've updated that and adjusted for data revisions and some of the
stronger than expected starting point in the December 25 quarter, the
official statistics, while we await the publication of the budget,
which will come out later today. So formally, we will
take any new announcement into account when they've been
formally decided on. So that is the
formal way that we do the forecasting.
So currently, we are looking at...
It's not been formally incorporated into this forecast.
Oh, sorry. I need to follow up on that.
So
it could get worse.
Unemployment could get worse.
So we
will consider everything that will affect
employment going forward.
Yeah.
We are seeing some parts of the New Zealand economy that is still performing
well. For example, the agricultural sector-
Mm-hmm
... some of the manufacturing sector, some of the tech sector.
There are other parts are performing
weaker, especially small domestic firms that are
dependent on the domestic economy.
And all of these factors we'll be taking into consideration,
including the budget that will be presented later today, but not
at this time.
Thanks. We've just got a second-
Thank you
... from Chloe Swarbrick, and then we're going across to Dr. David Lewis.
Thank you very much. I just wanted to pick up on that answer about the anticipated
growth that RBNZ has forecast and thread the
needle between a few points that are in the MPS.
So on page 20, RBNZ is saying that primary exporters' elevated
payouts and revenues are being used to reduce debt, not to invest.
On page 12, you say that commodity prices have assisted in the recovery and are
expected to fall however. You also say that retail,
hospitality, and tourism and residential construction firms are all reporting a
weakening of demand. On page 51, you are saying that house prices
are likely to decrease in 2026 and only gradually increase from
2027, and throughout the monetary policy statement you're saying that
businesses are cautious about investment, and unemployment is projected to be
higher because of those businesses' caution in hiring new workers.
So given that house price growth, continued commodity price increases, and
business investment are all expected to dampen in the short to medium term,
and that you have signaled today, or rather yesterday, that monetary conditions are
likely to continue to tighten, basically we are going into a higher
interest rate environment where both public and private sector investment
is being withdrawn. Where on earth is this growth going to come from?
I think it is still important, and it is a very challenging
environment to see that there are still parts of the economy that
are performing really well.
Mm-hmm.
So for example, the agricultural sector is benefiting from
high-
Jenny, why don't you-
... commodity prices in terms of meat prices, dairy prices.
We're seeing that the global supply chains and the
ships are still coming into New Zealand so exporters can get their goods
out. We're seeing that manufacturing is performing reasonably
well.
Mm-hmm.
The forward-looking sentiment indicators
are still okay in terms of those sectors.
We're also seeing that globally some people are looking
forDifferent safe, reliable countries to
source products from, and New Zealand is considered safe and
reliable business partner. So there are still
parts of the economy that are performing well.
We're also
stressing this in the record of the meetings.
We do say that we see regional and sectoral differences.
Mm-hmm.
And
we actually saw that in the first quarter data and some of the recent numbers on
export, that exports are performing better than expected.
The New Zealand dollar has been
almost unchanged since the beginning of the
year, but since the conflict started, it has weakened a little bit, so that's also
benefiting the exporting sector.
So there are clearly weaknesses, and we do say
that this caution will dampen growth in the near term, but there's
also some strong fundamental factors that means that when we get
a bit
more certainty, it's a globally uncertain environment.
We do expect those investments to come back and household sentiment to
also start increasing again. I don't know if Karen or Paul would
like to add.
Can I, prior to the conflict-
Mm
... we were seeing growth in the economy.
So we did have the point 2 in December last year was a wee bit lower than
we were expecting. But all the forward-looking indicators were reasonably
positive for Q1. We're projecting 1% growth in
Q1. There's some seasonality there, but there was growth in this economy.
And yes, Q2 and Q3 this year, much like last year, after
the tariffs are a bit weaker than we thought they were going to be, but then we do
have growth returning
from Q4 into next year. And the other factor there is low
interest rates-
Yeah
... of course. We have cut the OCR significantly.
Yes, we are heading into an environment where interest rates are likely to be a bit
higher,
because we've had this inflationary supply shock come at
us again, unfortunately.
Dr David Watson. Yeah. You're next. Thank you for those comments.
And completely understand the theme for around supply shop.
Very encouraging to hear that ag, manufacturing, exports, and employment are just
on the up-
Producing a good scrap down
... seeing through what's going on.
Didn't say unemployment, said employment.
No, I said ag export commodity prices anyway.
Yeah.
So given that we have from that August publishing company, The
Herald, this morning an article that says Iran
sees a low possibility of a return to war and that opening the
Straits of Hormuz will cause things to change, and I
understand that it already has, and excuse the
hyperbole, but oil prices have tumbled-
Mm-hmm
... and markets have reacted in an upward way.
So your prediction around near-term inflation's expected to increase and
economic growth to weaken,
given that information, and if that was to continue, do
you still believe that growth will weaken?
So we believe that growth will start picking up from the later this
year, but I think it's really important to say that the
outlook for New Zealand will depend on what happens globally, and that's
why in this monetary policy-
Mm
... statement we have, in addition to our central
projections, we do have alternative scenarios.
And some of those scenarios look at-
It might be
... because we want to emphasize that the main
projection is based on what we have currently, the
information is based on a view of the oil
price and what that means for fuel prices in New Zealand, that is
consistent with the futures curve, as you say it, where market is pricing
oil going forward. We know that that has been very volatile over the
past few months. So we do different scenarios where we
do one scenario where we say, "Well, what if oil price increase even
further and stays high for longer?
What would that mean for inflation and the New Zealand economy?" We also do
another scenario where we look at
what if we see considerably weaker growth,
and then we discuss what could happen with monetary policy in these kind of
scenarios. Just to emphasize that it is an
uncertain environment, and we will have to adjust because
our focus is to ensure that this temporary
near-term higher inflation does not become embedded in the economy.
Yeah.
So we will adjust-
Mm
... according to what happens globally and how
that affect New Zealand. And we will set monetary policy according to what is
best for New Zealand.
Now, supplementary on that, because this is material to what we've just been
talking about.
You're saying that wholesale interest rates passing through to higher
fixed-term mortgage rates-
Mm
... and to a lesser extent, term deposits.
So I'm interested, given that information, whether that's
actually correct,
and whether the market will react to that here as they have overseas.
But also, I'm really interested in your reflection on these
interest margins.
Are we still paying too much for our mortgages?
So I will give you a relatively technical answer.
Good.
And that is that-
It's your finance
... we do see that what we call financial conditions have tightened.
Yeah.
And what we've seen that wholesale interest rates have gone up considerably,
but also actual mortgage rates.
Mm.
So households are already facing higher mortgage rates without the OCR
going up.
Mm.
And that's also, we think, most like we don't have as good data on
the
interest rates that businesses are facing, but it's likely given wholesale interest
rate gone up, the businesses are already facing higher interest rates as well.
And when we look at the data, it seems that the term deposits
rate have not been increased as much as mortgage rates
and the interest rates that businesses face.
So that is tighter financial condition.
We do think that that is dampening demand somewhat, but
also then the medium-term inflationary pressures.
But I'd like to hand over to Karen to comment a bit more on this as well.
Yeah, I'll just add a little bit to
that. So yes, mortgage rates have gone up in response to wholesale
rates, which are marketAgain, reacting
to market interpretation around what central banks will do
in the face of higher inflation over the coming
months.
The transfer has not been as strong into savings,
in terms of the pass through there.
There are a number of things that you think about in terms
of the transmission there is, it's largely
banks here in New Zealand that hold those-
Mm
... savings. They're also taking into account credit demand,
which is not strong, and in a more cautionary environment
isn't going to be strong. So therefore, what is the demand for liquidity when
you're already sitting on a highly liquid
position? And bank liquidity is very strong at this
point in time. And so that's why you don't see as much price transfer
running through at this point in time.
But we would expect over time that that will
change
and that you would see migration coming through into retail interest
savings rates or term deposits
anyway,
as well as the transfer into mortgage rates.
But there's definitely a lag at this point in time, and that does increase the net
interest margin, as you've said.
Yeah. And so is that still translating into us paying too much for our mortgages as
compared to other jurisdictions?
Oh, relative to other jurisdictions, it is a higher
margin.
Yeah.
Thank you.
There is more information in the Financial Stability Report on this kind
of topics. But today we're focusing on the monetary policy.
And a great banking inquiry.
Claros will run.
So on page 28, you note that natural gas prices in Asia and
Europe have increased by 60 to 90%.
And you say, and I quote, "New Zealand does not import natural gas
and is therefore not directly exposed to this price increase, but many of our
trading partners in Europe and Asia will be affected."
Am I interpreting that correctly as follows
that basically, if the government's plan to establish a new LNG import
facility is successful, that we will be opening ourselves up
to yet another source of imported inflation, which
makes your job of maintaining price stability all the more difficult?
I think that what I said before in terms of making the
forecast based on current assumptions and current information is what we're
focusing on.
And so what we're looking at now is how does
the
conflict in the Middle East translate-
Mm-hmm
... into higher fuel prices in New Zealand currently.
So that is really-
So-
The focus on the current monetary policy statement
If I may, however, on that point, am I to read between the lines correctly in
that answer, Governor, that
the RBNZ is not anticipating that this
LNG import facility is going to happen?
So I think there's nothing to read in between the
lines. What I'm saying is that we're making the forecast based on the information
that we have currently and what will happen, and when we get more
information, we'll take that into consideration in our forecast.
So just to be really clear about what that information is that
RBNZ is currently taking into account with its forecasting and its
decision-making, what, in your mind, is the
status of the creation of this billion-dollar LNG import
facility and the potential ramifications for importer inflation and
exposure to it?
So currently, what we're taking into consideration is that we will be
looking for the information to come out, and when we have more information-
Mm
... then will we take that into the forecast.
And currently,
we don't have full information here exactly on how it will work out.
So it's currently not effectively in your forecast with regard to our exposure to
imported inflation.
Yes.
Thank you for making that clear. So on page 17, you're saying, and I
quote again,
"Elevated non-tradable inflation prior to the conflict mostly reflects high
administered price and energy inflation." So now in
the middle of the conflict, that phenomenon is of course
heightened. And throughout the monetary policy statement, the bank charts the
relationship between reliance on imported energy, as we've been talking about,
and our exposure to inflation. So I want to ask about this in
reference to some of the comments made in April of this year by the European
Central Bank's board member, Frank Elderson, who said, and I quote,
"That repeated energy price shocks make maintaining price stability
increasingly difficult."
And that meeting clean energy targets would weaken the link between volatile global
markets and domestic prices. So what is the bank's view
on price stability risks of increasing our country's reliance
on imported fossil fuels?
So I think that what we are seeing is that global
volatility will affect small open economies
considerably. That's true for all small open economies throughout
Asia and throughout Europe as well currently.
Our job is very focused on ensuring that
we meet the medium-term inflation target.
So if there is more volatility globally because of, it's the
COVID shock or it's energy prices, it could be something
else that will affect New Zealand,
we will consider that, but we will stay focused on our mandate, and
that is to bring inflation back in the medium term,
considering also
to not cause unnecessary volatility in economic
output.
Mm. And I understand, of course, there are very limited tools at your disposal,
which we've gone through many times over the last three years, especially
throughout COVID. On page 23, you talk about how businesses are
reporting that imported goods are increasing in price, and that they are
reporting that other costs have continued to rise, including electricity,
insurance, and council rates, which of course-
Mm
... information we can get from other sources.
What levers-Just to make it really clear to the, I don't know, half dozen
members of the public who may potentially be tuned in,
what levers does RBNZ have available to it to
actually reduce these rising costs?
And what levers does fiscal policy have available to it to reduce
rising costs in electricity and insurance, if any?
No, but it's important that OCR and hiking or
lowering interest rate is effective in terms of
controlling medium-term inflation.
Yeah.
Then we sometimes have graphs that shows that the effect on
some
types of pricer is higher than on others.
Mm-hmm.
So of course, there are certain things like global oil prices the
OCR in New Zealand will not affect, or certain other
prices are more external factors.
But there is, if you look over time,
the OCR, but it does take a bit of time before to be
efficient. It is a good tool in terms of
controlling medium-term inflation.
But we're not trying to claim that we can control all prices, but
we target the overall price increases
and not specific different kinds of price categories.
Mm-hmm.
So the target is really to get the
overall level inflation to be around 2% over the medium
term.
Mm-hmm.
And the OCR is efficient.
It's not perfect in any way, but it is efficient in reaching that.
But we are very
open and frank, and we've shown graphs showing that there are certain prices where
we have more of an impact than others.
Yeah. So just, I guess, to put that in crystal clarity, you guys don't have control
over imported inflation, but your major tools effectively are to
contract spending in the economy, which has flow-through to different effect on
certain types of goods and services.
Well, even imported inflation, it's important to remember that
how the firms that import set their prices-
Mm-hmm
... they control, and that's also affected by the
OCR and the level of the OCR. So even imported
prices to some extent was affected by monetary policy in New Zealand.
They do, yeah.
And also there is a channel with both
expectations, but also the exchange rate.
Yes.
So an higher OCR tends to strengthen the exchange
rate, and that reduces imported inflation.
Yeah.
So yes, as I said, there are certain prices that we
affect more than others, but even some parts of imported prices
will be affected by monetary policy.
Thanks. We're going to go to Dr. Megan Woods.
Thank you.
And look, just following on from that very quickly, one
of the things that I thought was really interesting in the report I noted the bit
around LNG prices. You tracked what you saw as the trajectory
for potentially, who knows in this world, in terms of crude and
refined products over the coming months.
Have you seen similar analysis on what might happen with LNG?
You're saying that
we're likely to see sort of a residual 30% left in some
scenarios in terms of the cost of
oil. Are we expecting the same in regard to LNG?
We have not done that analysis yet.
Okay, you haven't done that analysis.
No.
Right. Thank you. But following on from there, I thought this graph was
really interesting. This is the
fuel intensity over time.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
So one of the things that we're seeing is a slight uptick
in terms of the barrel of oil consumed per million dollars of
GDP.
In terms of what we need to do to get this
graph back onto the trajectory it was
on,
what would the impact on inflation be if New
Zealand was to become less and fuel intensive?
So I can answer in terms of how this oil shock
affect consumer prices. We have to consider that
fuel in the New Zealand economy that somehow affects inflation
comes both, of course, from petrol.
So most cars are running on petrol, not diesel.
Diesel prices is also affected, of course.
I'm stating the obvious now.
Diesel is really important for transportation, it's very important for
agriculture. But what we measure is the consumer
prices.
Yeah.
So the petrol prices is more important for the direct effect of this
crisis on
inflation. But we also have to consider the fact that diesel
costs have also gone up, but that's used by businesses mainly.
Yeah.
And then they face higher cost, and to some extent, that higher cost
may be passed on to other businesses and then maybe to consumers.
Yeah.
Sorry, my throat. Now I'm fine.
Currently what we're seeing in inflation so far is just the
direct effect on petrol prices. And over coming months,
we will also focus on and get more information to the extent
that
firms are facing higher costs for transportation, how much
they're passing on to consumers. But that's just to explain a
little bit how we analyze these factors,
and pointing out that for the direct effects on the
consumers-
Yeah
... it is currently the petrol price.
We don't ignore the fact that other fuel costs are also going up.
But then you have to consider that even
plastics, which is used by many firms, will also go up
because it's also based on petrochemicals.
Fertilizers will also affect agriculture over time.
So what we are saying is that we are aware of the fact that
this will take some time before we see all of the effects, and then it will
depend on how quickly global oil prices and peace
talks evolve over the coming weeks and months.
And going forward-
And the changes that you're-
Suggesting or the question you're asking depends
on what the
cost of the substitute is. Yeah. Totally.
So, and/or is it delivered through less demand?
So there's a lot of dynamics you have to take into account when you're
thinking about answering a question like that, because it's not just
about oil in itself, it's what are you substituting to
and/or what's happening to demand.
So our domestic-
So that it is substitution, not contraction.
And then what's the flow-on impact to GDP of that.
Yeah.
Just the other question I just want to touch on is the transparency
change, because I think this is
huge,
and congratulations on that. And just thinking-
Especially in the age of social media.
Just thinking as we go forward, we had the split
decision, and I think there's a very small subset of
people in the country that are going to be absolutely obsessed with the
different decisions. As you think about this
into the future, we had the kind of three-three split with the
Reserve Bank and the non-Reserve Bank decision makers, if I
can use those terms. What are you going to do to kind
of make sure, and I'm not accusing you of this, but I'm just
interested in it, that we
don't have a
central RBNZ view and then the others.
What are we going to do to avoid
the bump into conversations of those people that work together, kind
of having a consolidated view versus the
externals?
It's a really important and good question, and I really think you should see
everyone as Reserve Bank decision-makers.
Mm-hmm.
Because they all are
part of, obviously, the Monetary Policy Committee, and they
feel very strongly-
Yeah
... about their role. And everyone was in
favor of increasing the transparency.
I think it's an important fact that we all get the same
information. We all have access to
the same team that present all the recent data, the
economic forecast. I am very conscious when we
have our meetings to ensure that everyone gets an
equal amount of time to speak. And when
we do the deliberations on monetary policy
and everyone is free to talk about their view of it, of
course. But I always speak last because I think it's
important for the other people to give their opinions first, and that
everyone gets an equal amount of time, so that
we do get equal weight across the different members of the Monetary
Policy Committee. And
the new charter also encourages the external
members to take interviews and to do
outreach, to give a speech if they want to.
So I think that we will also get the opportunity to hear more directly
from them going forward.
Well, look, congratulations.
Thank you.
It's a necessary and courageous way of doing things, and thank you for doing
it. And I think it's going to be interesting to watch how it evolves over time.
Thank you. Thanks, Megan. Nancy Lou.
Thank you, Chair. Welcome, Governor.
Thank you.
I wanted to also add on to my congratulations to you
for making that very transparent.
And it sounds like you are encouraging everybody to take on
the equal weighting, sharing that responsibility.
But I particularly
am a big fan of when you shared earlier, you want to make sure that there is
increased communication and transparency so New Zealanders can
understand.
I don't think it's necessarily about the Reserve Bank understanding each other
or the committee members on this committee, but it is about the New
Zealanders.
And
the point that I want to reflect on is particularly where we're now
under huge global uncertainty and it's
unprecedented, right? It's global, so all countries
equally
are being impacted by the Iran war.
And all countries and economies are also under the word of
uncertainty. So my two questions, one
relating to what you have summarized on page 20, which is the business
and the sector bit. You mentioned in your earlier meetings when you
came in front of us that you are keen to
travel around the country, keen to go to the different sectors.
But I want more from you about what you're hearing from the
sectors about this uncertainty. How uncertain are
they?
And what do they want to see, and how much are they absorbing it?
That's number one part of the question.
The other part is also around communication, which is
how much are you communicating with the other jurisdictions, with the other reserve
banks around the uncertainty,
particularly in our part of the world,
and with Australia? I would love to hear more about that. Thank you.
Yeah. Well, thank you so much. So we
do outreach towards businesses in several different
ways. So we do regularly
business calls. So staff actually meets with a
number of firms on a regular basis just to collect
information and get a bit more a sense of where things are heading
before we get it in the official statistics.
And then in addition to that, we also do it in person.
I do outreach. Karen is traveling to Tauranga
soon. I'm traveling to Napier tonight.
Our external member is Healy Gourley, who's here.
She joined me in Hamilton about a month ago.
I know that Carl is also planning to join me on one of my
business visits later. Currently, what we're hearing
is-Actually, some businesses,
especially those focused on exports, are
doing well, but they are concerned about the uncertainty in
the global environment.
Mm-hmm.
The domestic firms that are more reliant on
consumers, for example, they are struggling more
in this environment. And
I still think that many of them are
surprisingly optimistic. But I think also because there's been a number of
global shocks over the past few years, they've also seen
that if they keep on focusing over the coming few years,
some of them can keep investing, even in a
difficult environment. They know they're better positioned.
Some of them have been very successful in terms of
diversifying their exports.
That's good.
And that means that they're well-positioned in this environment.
But if you look at
the smaller businesses, hospitality businesses,
depending on households that are being squeezed right now, that's where we
see the toughest situation, because they've already been struggling for a
number of years. The other question was on the international side, and-
Yeah
... both the Reserve Bank as a group and me personally have a lot of
contacts with other central banks.
So I travel regularly to
the Bank of International Settlements that's headquartered in Basel in
Switzerland, and that is about 68 central bank governors who
meet
six times per year. One is digital, and the other five meetings are actually in
person. So I was there in early May. I was there in March.
I also went to the IMF meetings to get a chance.
We also have an East Asia-Pacific special collaboration between
central banks called EMEAP. Karen was recently-
Yeah
... at the deputy meetings. I'm going to the governors meeting in Singapore
in July. But I thought maybe you wanted to, since you were recently there, you
might comment.
Yeah. So we have these twice yearly.
Wow.
And meet to discuss what's happening in our respective economies, what's
happening across the region.
They are-
Mm
... and
you'll appreciate we have some emerging economies, we have some advanced
economies within the group. So it's quite different
in terms of the experiences, and starting point matters
in these kind of situations.
Our trading partners in that part of the world
have been doing very well over recent years.
AI investment, broader technology investment has really
created
good positions for them. They continue to see that as a
significant opportunity and buffers for their economies moving forward.
But likewise, they're also facing into significant
issues as a consequence of oil prices because they are very
oil-intensive and fossil fuel-intensive economies, and are
very conscious of that as well, and
expressing a real need for investment for diversification into greater renewables
as a consequence.
Thank you. We're just going a supplementary on-
Yeah. Just you mentioned about the uncertainty you are
seeing from businesses and their confidence to invest.
Is it all driven internationally price shock, or are there regulatory
settings here in New Zealand that's probably giving cause for concern or
confidence to go forward with investments?
You want to-
Yeah. What businesses like is certainty.
And they need certainty in order to be able
to
do the investment, take on extra debt, and/or cost
of equity
injections in order to be able to do that.
I think if you went to various different sectors, they would argue that regulation
doesn't make it as easy
for them to do that. But at the moment,
a lot of that precautionary behavior is a consequence of the repeat supply
shocks that we see. It's not just about oil.
Yeah.
It is about what happened last year with tariffs.
It is about what happened through COVID.
So
certainty is the biggest thing.
Yeah.
Dr. David, do you have a question?
The domestic regulatory environment is fundamental-
Yeah
... in providing businesses with uncertainty. It's not all just an oil shock.
No.
It is at the moment.
Yeah.
That's the predominant kind of force.
But yeah, predictability-
It is
... and domestic regulatory settings is important.
Yeah, a supplementary.
Dr. David.
Thank you, Chair. And thank you, Nancy, for your question.
You'll notice that we hang on every word you say here, and the couple of words you
used were diversifying exports. Is that markets or products
or both?
So what I hear, I was thinking mainly about markets actually.
So that's what I heard. I would be surprised if it's not products as
well.
But what we've seen, and I met a number of firms that talked
about that they've been very actively over the past few
years
seeing many global shocks, been focusing on having lots of
different markets to export to, and that they're also saying that they're
now
seeing the benefits of having done that in terms of being able
to still see good demand for their products.
It's not-
But some of them are also very skilled in terms
of seeing where is demand in the global economy.
So globally, there's a lot of, for sad reasons
unfortunately, investments in defense spending.
So some people that's coming from the agricultural business originally, they're
moving more into security, and then they see a lot of demand, and
that is benefiting them. So businesses,
many have been skillful in diversifying both in terms of products and
markets.
And diversity brings resilience.
Yeah. Tom Rutherford.
Great. I want to talk about the split decision yesterday.
Obviously, the first time the committee has reported onThe
individual voting of the members.
In front of us, we have the three members who voted to keep.
Oh, yeah. Okay.
So that irony isn't lost in that sense.
I guess I'm keen firstly to understand the rationale from
you three as to why you voted to stay.
It's obviously evident in here.
Mm-hmm.
But I want to hear it from the horse's mouth.
Yeah.
And then I would welcome those that are also here who
voted to increase-
This is the time to-
... to share their views as well.
Yeah. So I think it is
welcome that we now have the record of the meetings with
names, because I think everyone felt more comfortable that they got
to
state their individual views in the record of the meetings.
We have agreed,
yesterday at the press conference and also at the hearings, that we will
represent the
Monetary Policy Committee, but I know that Carl has already
given an interview, and there will be more interviews for the individual
members so they can give their view.
What we have said
yesterday is that the members who were in favor of raising the
OCR, they were more concerned with the risk of cost pressure
leading to stronger second-round effects, so that there'll be more persistence
in inflation going forward.
Those of us who voted for a hold, when we looked at the
data and what that means for inflation going forward, we
maybe put some more emphasis on the fact that core inflation is still very much
within the band. It was 2.3% in the latest numbers.
Wage growth is still subdued and expected to be subdued, and
medium and long-term inflation expectations are still well anchored.
And in addition, we've seen this tightening in financial conditions.
So mortgage rates, for example, have already gone up.
Mm.
Plus, we see the weak demand putting less risk on the
medium-term inflationary pressures.
But we all say that we see the inflationary pressures and we
all expect the OCR to need to
be at a higher level going forward, and that we will hike at coming meetings.
Great, and I'd love to hear from Paul and-
Hayley
... and Hayley. Sorry
Karen. Karen.
No, from the members sitting behind you who voted.
But we have made the agreement that at the press
conference at today's meeting-
Mm-hmm
... we would represent the committee, and then we refer to the record of the
meetings.
Okay.
And also to upcoming interviews for
them to give more of their view. But we have actually discussed,
so this is for the committee to consider, whether you want to have a longer table.
Yeah. I'm-
That would allow all of us to be up here and answer questions at the same time
going forward. But maybe Karen and Paul would like to add as well.
Look, just quickly, I think it's important to emphasize what we agreed on-
Yeah
... which was the economic projections we did and the OCR track.
The only difference was whether or not to increase by 25 or not
yesterday, and we come back together in six weeks-
Yeah
... as of yesterday, and we will start afresh
then. So, there's a difference of view across committee members
on that aspect of the decision, but there is no division
in the committee.
Our deliberations were
robust and rigorous and respectful, and we all left that room
with our mana in good shape.
Mm.
Oh, I don't think there't any diminishing from this side that the reporting of the
voting and who voted what way is not a good thing.
Mm-hmm.
That is a great thing to see. I guess the clarity I'm trying to seek
is we're hearing from the three who voted-
This is just to confirm
... to keep the status quo.
It's well laid out in the record of the meeting.
Yeah. But I'm interested to know also from those that voted to
increase-
Yeah
... you're saying they're going to do interviews and speeches and things.
Can you step that through for us? What are they?
Well, hang on.
Sorry.
Yeah.
Debra, it's okay. I think it's been asked and answered,
so I think we'll leave that question there. I am mindful of time.
I'm going to go to you for a quick primary, Debra.
Thank you. I want to go-
I know there's agitation. I have tried to be fair.
Yeah, I know. You're doing really well.
Look, I just want to go to the spare capacity.
We've discussed a fair amount about the labor market, but there's a bit
about non-labor market spare capacity-
Mm-hmm
... in the economy. You used something you call the
structural vector autoregression.
Could we do that again next time?
But could you just speak a little to what's going on with that spare non-labor
capacity in the economy?
Yeah. So when we talk about
where the labor market is and the potential to increase
employment, but then it's also the fact that businesses a certain
level of capacity in terms of how much their machinery is being used, how
much their factories are being used, and that kind of spare
capacity, and we still believe that there are some.
It means that if demand increases, they can increase
output relatively easily. In some cases,
they're really constrained. They're operating at full capacity, and then they
would have to buy new machinery to just increase output,
and we're not at that point right now.
So we see the potential to, if we see stronger
demand, to actually see stronger output relatively quickly as
well.
Okay. Are you seeing differences across sectors in that spare capacity-
Yeah
... I believe you said?
Yeah. So there are definitely
differences across sectors currently.
Mm.
I would say that some
sectors, say for example, hospitality.
That's also very seasonal.
Yeah.
But now we're currently seeing households being a bit more cautious,
and that means that they would have more spare
capacity in terms of meeting demand-
Mm
... if demand comes back. So there's definitely sectoral differences.
Thank you so much, Debra.
Thank you.
Thank you. Governor, good to have you here.
Obviously budget day today as well.
But the finance minister has indicated thatwants to get
bend the surplus, sorry, bend the deficit back down and get us back into
surplus, likely to not see a huge amount of
spending through the operating allowance today.
Will that have an upward or downward impact on inflationary
pressures?
That's-
So what we-
Good question, but hard
Yeah. So, but this is important because-
Yeah
... as I said, the current main forecast is
based on
information that has not been provided yet.
So we will take that into consideration later, and will have to do
a thorough review of all that information.
We do think, and that was the discussion we had at the committee, that
the global forces and what's happening to supply chains,
oil prices, and how that plays through is
such a large factor that is likely to
have a larger impact on inflationary pressures going forward,
compared to what we're expecting from
the budget today, because quite a lot is already known.
So I think that's also why we have the alternative scenarios, just
to emphasize how much the global factors are
impacting.
But it, of course, then how that plays out in the New Zealand
economy.
If we get our response to the oil shock right, we'll be in
a good place to deal with any variance between what was in the
Half yearly financial statement, which is the numbers that are in there now,
compared to the budget numbers that we'll get this afternoon.
No, I want you-
I'm not quite clear that you did talk about medium term inflationary
pressures. So if the government was to surprise you and borrow and spend
considerably more, would that have upward impact on
OCR and potentially the amount that New Zealand households have to pay
through their mortgage interest rates?
So I would say that what would matter is we would always look really carefully
at all the different detail to see if there are any inflation or
deflationary pressures, and I don't want
to speculate before we have the full picture on
that. But currently, we don't see
inflationary forces from the fiscal side.
Thank you. Chloe?
Depends what you spend on. You raised the specter earlier of
AI, and I just actually wanted to offer you an opportunity to provide some
potential caveats or more information.
Because if someone was to take the comment you provided before and run with it, it
sounds like AI is the silver bullet.
It means that other countries are becoming more productive and more inclined to
grow. However, we also know that AI, if you look at commentary and
economists internationally,
possibly a bubble, and is promising a lot of things that it cannot potentially
deliver. Also comes with massive externalities in terms of the
impact on the environment and the displacement of workers.
And I think we all know that when we have these gains in productivity from
certain types of tools or technology coming online that might result in
growth or productivity, but that distributional impacts mean that that is not
necessarily evenly felt. So do you want to offer any
greater detail to that statement that you made about how AI is an
advantage?
I think that
if we made comments on AI that are not balanced, we
will review that.
Yeah.
I think that we see many different aspects, and we talk about monetary
policy today-
Yes
... but we did talk about it in the Financial Stability Report in terms of
risks, because we also see the risk that AI being used for cyber
attacks and things like that, and we're very vigilant for those
kinds of risks.
What we said in this report is that we know, and that's what Karen was talking
about as well, that some of our Asian trading partners have seen an
AI investment boom.
And that has meant that growth is stronger and that is benefiting some of
our exporters. But of course, we also see
other sides in terms of how it will affect the labor market
going forward. So, we believe it's one of the things
that we are
looking at from a broad range of perspectives.
Thank you.
And we definitely want to be balanced.
Thank you, Governor. We have just about met time.
Is there a final comment or commentary you'd like to leave to New Zealanders,
obviously in the midst of this anxiety-induced budget day, what would
be your parting comments?
I want New Zealanders to feel that we're fully focused
on bringing inflation back to target.
We do consider all the risks to the economic
development. So our focus is on bringing inflation back to
target without causing unnecessary volatility
in economic output.
Thank you all so much for your time.
Thank you.
And we wish you all the best in the next few months.
Thank you. That was really useful.
Thanks, members. We'll see you at 4:30.
Well done.
Thanks, Deborah